PVM and MPI: a Comparison of Features
G. A. Geist
J. A. Kohl
P. M. Papadopoulos \Lambda
May 30, 1996
Abstract
This paper compares PVM and MPI features, pointing out the situ≠
ations where one may be favored over the other. Application developers
can determine where their application most likely will run and if it re≠
quires particular features supplied by only one or the other of the APIs.
MPI is expected to be faster within a large multiprocessor. It has
many more point≠to≠point and collective communication options than
PVM. This can be important if an algorithm is dependent on the ex≠
istence of a special communication option. MPI also has the ability to
specify a logical communication topology.
PVM is better when applications will be run over heterogeneous net≠
works. It has good interoperability between different hosts. PVM allows
the development of fault tolerant applications that can survive host or
task failures. Because the PVM model is built around the virtual ma≠
chine concept (not present in the MPI model), it provides a powerful set
of dynamic resource manager and process control functions.
Each API has its unique strengths and this will remain so into the
foreseeable future. One area of future research is to study the feasibility
of creating a programming environment that allows access to the virtual
machine features of PVM and the message passing features of MPI.
1. Introduction
The recent emergence of the MPI (Message Passing Interface) specification
[2] has caused many programmers to wonder whether they should write their
applications in MPI or use PVM (Parallel Virtual Machine) [3]. PVM is the
existing de facto standard for distributed computing and MPI is being touted as
the future message passing standard. A related concern of users is whether they
\Lambda This work was supported in part by the Applied Mathematical Sciences subprogram
of the Office of Energy Research, U.S. Department of Energy, under Contract DE≠AC05≠
96OR22464 with Lockheed Martin Energy Research Corporation
1

should invest the time and effort to rewrite their existing PVM applications in
MPI.
In this paper we address these questions by comparing the features supplied
by PVM and the features supplied by MPI and showing under which situations
one API might be favored over another. Programmers can then assess the
needs of their application and decide accordingly.
Computer vendors are driven by the needs of their buyers, some of whom
insist on PVM and others on MPI. Therefore, all the major vendors have now
committed resources to provide both PVM and MPI on their systems. This
removes concerns of availability and support for either PVM or MPI and allows
us to concentrate on the features and capabilities that distinguish them.
We have been involved in the design of both PVM and MPI. The design
process was quite different in both cases as were the focus and goals of the
designs. Some background material will help better illustrate how PVM and
MPI differ and why each has features the other does not.
2. Background
The development of PVM started in the summer of 1989 when Vaidy Sun≠
deram, a professor at Emory University, visited Oak Ridge National Laboratory
to do research with Al Geist on heterogeneous distributed computing. They
needed a framework to explore this new area and so developed the concept of
a Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM) [8, 4]. In 1991, Bob Manchek (a research
associate at the University of Tennessee) joined the research and implemented
a portable, robust version of the PVM design (PVM 2.0). Jack Dongarra, who
was also involved in our heterogeneous distributed computing research, was
instrumental in making PVM 2.0 publically available. The use of PVM grew
rapidly worldwide as scientists spread the word of the utility of this software
to do computational research.
Central to the design of PVM was the notion of a ``virtual machine'' --
a set of heterogeneous hosts connected by a network that appears logically
to the user as a single large parallel computer. One aspect of the virtual
machine was how parallel tasks exchanged data. In PVM this was accomplished
using simple message≠passing constructs. There was a strong desire to keep the
PVM interface simple to use and understand. Portability was considered much
more important than performance for two reasons: communication across the
internet was slow; and, the research was focused on problems with scaling, fault
tolerance, and heterogeneity of the virtual machine.
As the PVM user base grew into the thousands, a conscious effort was
made to keep the PVM API backwards compatible so that all existing PVM
applications would continue to run unchanged with newer PVM versions. All
PVM version 2 releases are backwards compatible, as are all PVM version 3
releases. PVM 3.0 was released in 1993 with a completely new API. The API
change and new design were required to enable a PVM application to run across
a virtual machine composed of multiple large multiprocessors.
2

The PVM API has continuously evolved over the years to satisfy user re≠
quests for additional features and to keep up with the fast≠changing network
and computing technology. One example of a user≠requested feature was the
addition of interfaces that allow third≠party debuggers and resource managers
to be seamlessly incorporated into the virtual machine [9, 6]. Examples of
technology driven changes include the ability for PVM to transparently uti≠
lize shared memory and high≠speed networks like ATM to move data between
clusters of shared≠memory multiprocessors.
In contrast to the PVM API, which sprang from and continues to evolve in≠
side a research project, the MPI≠1 API was specified by a committee of about
40 high performance computing experts from research and industry in a se≠
ries of meetings in 1993≠1994. The impetus for developing MPI was that each
Massively Parallel Processor (MPP) vendor was creating their own proprietary
message≠passing API. In this scenario it was not possible to write a portable
parallel application. MPI is intended to be a standard message≠passing speci≠
fication that each MPP vendor would implement on their system. The MPP
vendors need to be able to deliver high performance and this became the focus
of the MPI design. Given this design focus, MPI is expected to always be faster
than PVM on MPP hosts. Even so, two recent comparison studies show that
PVM and MPI have very comparable performance on the Cray T3D and IBM
SP≠2 [10, 5].
MPI≠1 contains the following main features:
ffl A large set of point≠to≠point communication routines (by far the richest
set of any library to date),
ffl A large set of collective communication routines for communication among
groups of processes,
ffl A communication context that provides support for the design of safe
parallel software libraries,
ffl The ability to specify communication topologies,
ffl The ability to create derived datatypes that describe messages of non≠
contiguous data.
MPI≠1 users soon discovered that their applications were not portable across
a network of workstations because there was no standard method to start MPI
tasks on separate hosts. Different MPI implementations used different methods.
In 1995 the MPI committee began meeting to design the MPI≠2 specification
to correct this problem and to add additional communication functions to MPI
including:
ffl MPI SPAWN functions to start both MPI and non≠MPI processes,
ffl One≠sided communication functions such as put and get,
3

ffl Nonblocking collective communication functions
ffl Language bindings for C++.
The MPI≠2 draft specification is scheduled to be finished by January 1997.
In its present form the MPI≠2 draft adds an additional 120 functions to the 128
functions specified in the MPI≠1 API. This makes MPI a much richer source of
communication methods than PVM.
Will there be an MPI≠3? It is too soon to tell but there are some useful
features available in PVM that will not be available in MPI≠2. MPI users may
request an MPI≠3 specification that allows them to create fault tolerant appli≠
cations, interoperates among different MPI implementations, and dynamically
determines available resources.
In the sections that follow, we discuss the major feature differences between
MPI and PVM.
3. Portability versus Interoperability
Heterogeneity is becoming increasingly important for high performance
computing. Massively parallel processors appear to be a dying breed, leading
scientists with serious computational needs to look towards clusters of smaller
multiprocessors connected by new high≠speed networks. Many organizations
already use a variety of different computing systems in the form of different
personal computers or workstations on their employees' desks. Integrating
these desktop machines and utilizing their unused cycles can be an effective
way of obtaining reasonable computational power. Parallel software systems
therefore need to accommodate execution on many different vendor platforms.
In addition to running on MPPs, PVM and some implementations of MPI
already work on networked clusters of machines.
The MPI interface was developed with the intent of encompassing all of
the message≠passing constructs and features of various MPP and networked
clusters so that programs would execute on each type of system. The portability
achieved by MPI means that a program written for one architecture can be
copied to a second architecture, compiled and executed without modification.
PVM also supports this level of portability, but expands the definition of
portable to include interoperable. PVM programs similarly can be copied to
different architectures, compiled and executed without modification. However,
the resulting PVM executables can also communicate with each other. In other
words, an MPI application can run, as a whole, on any single architecture and is
portable in that sense. But a PVM program can be ported heterogeneously to
run cooperatively across any set of different architectures at the same time (i.e.
interoperate). While the MPI standard does not prohibit such heterogeneous
cooperation, it does not require it. Nothing in the MPI standard describes
cooperation across heterogeneous networks and architectures. And there is
no impetus for one vendor to make its MPI implementation slower in order
4

to allow a user to use another vendor's machine. None of the existing MPI
implementations can interoperate.
There would need to be another standard -- one for interoperability. MPI
would need to check the destination of every message and determine if the
destination task is on the same host or on some other host. If it is on some other
host, with that vendor's MPI implementation, the message must be converted
into a format that can be understood by the other MPI version.
The lack of MPI's flexibility in this scenario comes from the pre≠emptive
priority of performance in its design. The best way to make a message≠passing
program fast on any single architecture is to streamline the underlying library to
use native hardware and eliminate any unnecessary waste for that architecture.
For example, if a certain architecture provides some built≠in mechanism for
broadcasting messages, the MPI implementation should use that mechanism
directly. However, using that native mechanism makes it more difficult and
less efficient to use broadcast functions to send messages to hosts of different
vendors that do not support the mechanism.
The PVM solution to this problem is to sacrifice some performance in fa≠
vor of the flexibility to communicate across architectural boundaries. When
communicating locally or to another host of identical architecture, PVM uses
the native communication functions just like MPI. When communicating to a
different architecture, PVM uses the standard network communication func≠
tions. Because the PVM library must determine from the destination of each
message whether to use the native or network communication, there is some
small overhead incurred.
PVM and MPI also differ in their approach to language interoperability. In
PVM, a C program can send a message that is received by a Fortran program
and vice≠versa. In contrast, a program written in C is not required by the
MPI standard to communicate with a program written in Fortran, even if
executing on the same architecture. This restriction occurs because C and
Fortran support fundamentally different language interfaces, causing difficulty
in defining a consistent standard interface that covers both. The MPI decision
was to not force the two languages to interoperate.
4. Virtual Machine
PVM is built around the concept of a virtual machine which is a dynamic
collection of (potentially heterogeneous) computational resources managed as
a single parallel computer. The virtual machine concept is fundamental to
the PVM perspective and provides the basis for heterogeneity, portability, and
encapsulation of functions that constitute PVM.
It is the virtual machine concept that has revolutionized heterogeneous dis≠
tributed computing by linking together different workstations, personal com≠
puters and massively parallel computers to form a single integrated computa≠
tional engine. In contrast, MPI has focused on message≠passing and explicitly
5

states that resource management and the concept of a virtual machine are
outside the scope of the MPI (1 and 2) standard.
4.1. Process Control
Process control refers to the ability to start and stop tasks, to find out
which tasks are running, and possibly where they are running. PVM contains
all of these capabilities. In contrast MPI≠1 has no defined method to start a
parallel application. MPI≠2 will contain functions to start a group of tasks and
to send a kill signal to a group of tasks (and possibly other signals as well).
Some basic resource query capability is important in order to know how
many tasks can be started on the available (possibly dynamic) computing re≠
sources. In this regard, PVM has a rich set of resource control functions.
4.2. Resource Control
In terms of resource management, PVM is inherently dynamic in nature.
Computing resources, or ``hosts,'' can be added or deleted at will, either from a
system ``console'' or even from within the user's application. Allowing applica≠
tions to interact with and manipulate their computing environment provides a
powerful paradigm for load balancing, task migration, and fault tolerance. The
virtual machine provides a framework for determining which tasks are running
and supports naming services so that independently spawned tasks can find
each other and cooperate.
Another aspect of virtual machine dynamics relates to efficiency. User appli≠
cations can exhibit potentially changing computational needs over the course of
their execution. Hence, a message≠passing infrastructure should provide flexible
control over the amount of computational power being utilized. For example,
consider a typical application which begins and ends with primarily serial com≠
putations, but contains several phases of heavy parallel computation. A large
MPP need not be wasted as part of the virtual machine for the serial portions,
and can be added just for those portions when it is of most value. Likewise,
consider a long≠running application in which the user occasionally wishes to
attach a graphical front≠end to view the computation's progress. Without vir≠
tual machine dynamics, the graphical workstation would have to be allocated
during the entire computation. MPI lacks such dynamics and is, in fact, specif≠
ically designed to be static in nature to improve performance. There is clearly
a trade≠off in flexibility and efficiency for this extra margin of performance.
Aside from more tangible effects, the virtual machine in PVM also serves to
encapsulate and organize resources for parallel programs. Rather than leaving
the parallel programmer to manually select each individual host where tasks are
to execute and then log into each machine in turn to actually spawn the tasks
and monitor their execution, the virtual machine provides a simple abstraction
to encompass the disparate machines. Further, this resource abstraction is
carefully layered to allow varying degrees of control. The user might create an
arbitrary collection of machines and then treat them as uniform computational
6

nodes, regardless of their architectural differences. Or the user could traverse
the increasing levels of detail and request that certain tasks execute on machines
with particular data formats, architectures, or even on an explicitly named
machine.
The MPI standard does not support any abstraction for computing re≠
sources and leaves each MPI implementation or user to customize their own
management scheme. Though such a customized scheme can ultimately be
more convenient for a particular user's needs, the overhead to construct the
scheme counters the gains. With PVM, this customization is always possible
using the existing ``virtual machinery,'' should the user desire more control.
4.3. Topology
Although MPI does not have a concept of a virtual machine, MPI does
provide a higher level of abstraction on top of the computing resources in terms
of the message≠passing topology. In MPI a group of tasks can be arranged in
a specific logical interconnection topology. Communication among tasks then
takes place within that topology with the hope that the underlying physical
network topology will correspond and expedite the message transfers. PVM
does not support such an abstraction, leaving the programmer to manually
arrange tasks into groups with the desired communication organization.
5. Fault Tolerance
Fault tolerance is a critical issue for any large scale scientific computer ap≠
plication. Long≠running simulations, which can take days or even weeks to
execute, must be given some means to gracefully handle faults in the system or
the application tasks. Without fault detection and recovery it is unlikely that
such applications will ever complete. For example, consider a large simulation
running on dozens of workstations. If one of those many workstations should
crash or be rebooted, then tasks critical to the application might disappear.
Additionally, if the application hangs or fails, it may not be immediately ob≠
vious to the user. Many hours could be wasted before it is discovered that
something has gone wrong. Further, there are several types of applications
that explicitly require a fault≠tolerant execution environment, due to safety or
level of service requirements. In any case, it is essential that there be some
well≠defined scheme for identifying system and application faults and automat≠
ically responding to them, or at least providing timely notification to the user
in the event of failure.
PVM has supported a basic fault notification scheme for some time. Under
the control of the user, tasks can register with PVM to be ``notified'' when the
status of the virtual machine changes or when a task fails. This notification
comes in the form of special event messages that contain information about the
particular event. A task can ``post'' a notify for any of the tasks from which
it expects to receive a message. In this scenario, if a task dies, the receiving
7

task will get a notify message in place of any expected message. The notify
message allows the task an opportunity to respond to the fault without hanging
or failing.
Similarly, if a specific host like an I/O server is critical to the application,
then the application tasks can post notifies for that host. The tasks will then
be informed if that server exits the virtual machine, and they can allocate
a new I/O server. This type of virtual machine notification is also useful in
controlling computing resources. When a host exits from the virtual machine,
tasks can utilize the notify messages to reconfigure themselves to the remaining
resources. When a new host computer is added to the virtual machine, tasks
can be notified of this as well. This information can be used to redistribute
load or expand the computation to utilize the new resource. Several systems
have been designed specifically for this purpose, including the WoDi system [7]
which uses Condor [6] on top of PVM.
There are several important issues to consider when providing a fault no≠
tification scheme. For example, a task might request notification of an event
after it has already occurred. PVM immediately generates a notify message in
response to any such ``after≠the≠fact'' request. For example, if a ``task exit'' no≠
tification request is posted for a task that has already exited, a notify message
is immediately returned. Similarly, if a ``host exit'' request is posted for a host
that is no longer part of the virtual machine, a notify message is immediately
returned. It is possible for a ``host add'' notification request to occur simultane≠
ously with the addition of a new host into the virtual machine. To alleviate this
race condition, the user must poll the virtual machine after the notify request
to obtain the complete virtual machine configuration. Subsequently, PVM can
then reliably deliver any new ``host add'' notifies.
The current MPI standard does not include any mechanisms for fault tol≠
erance, although the upcoming MPI≠2 standard will include a notify scheme
similar to PVM's. The problem with the MPI≠1 model in terms of fault tol≠
erance is that the tasks and hosts are considered to be static. An MPI≠1
application must be started en masse as a single group of executing tasks. If
a task or computing resource should fail, the entire MPI≠1 application must
fail. This is certainly effective in terms of preventing leftover or hung tasks.
However, there is no way for an MPI program to gracefully handle a fault, let
alone recover automatically.
The reasons for the static nature of MPI are based on performance as well
as convenience. Because all MPI tasks are always present, there is no need
for any time≠consuming lookups for group membership or name service. Each
task already knows about every other task, and all communications can be
made without the explicit need for a special daemon. Because all potential
communication paths are known at startup, messages can also, where possible,
be directly routed over custom task≠to≠task channels.
MPI≠2 will include a specification for spawning new processes. This expands
the capabilities of the original static MPI≠1. New processes can be created
dynamically, but MPI≠2 still has no mechanism to recover from the spontaneous
8

loss of a process. One of the fundamental problems that keeps MPI from being
fault tolerant is the synchronous way that communicators are created and freed.
In the next section we compare the way MPI and PVM handle communicators
and communication context in general.
6. Context for Safe Communication
The most important new concept introduced by MPI is the communicator.
The communicator can be thought of as a binding of a communication con≠
text to a group of processes. Having a communication context allows library
packages written in message passing systems to protect or mark their messages
so that they are not received (incorrectly) by the user's code. Message tag
and sender ID is not enough to safely distinguish library messages from user
messages. Figure 1 illustrates the fundamental problem. In this figure two
identical worker tasks are calling a library routine that also performs message
passing. The library and user's code have both chosen the same tag to mark a
message. Without context, messages are received in the wrong order. To solve
this problem, a third tag that is assigned by the operating system is needed to
distinguish user messages from library messages. Upon entrance to a library
routine, for example, the software would determine this third tag and use it
for all communications within the library. The remainder of this section will
compare and contrast the specification of context in MPI and PVM version
3.4. Context primitives are a new feature in PVM 3.4.
Context is assigned by the operating environment and cannot be wild≠
carded by a user program. Two important issues are how this ``magic'' tag
is derived and how the tag is distributed to all processes that need to use it for
communication.
MPI couples the concepts of context and a group of processes into a commu≠
nicator. When a program starts, all tasks are given a ``world'' communicator
and a (static) listing of all the tasks that started together. When a new group
(context) is needed, the program makes a synchronizing call to derive the new
context from an existing one (intra≠communication). The derivation of context
becomes a synchronous operation across all the processes that are forming a
new communicator. This has several advantages: no servers are required to
dispense a context, instead processes need only decide among themselves on a
mutually exclusive safe context tag; all context state is dissolved (and hence
re≠usable) when one or more of the processes terminates; and, derivation and
distribution of context are always performed in a single call. However, in MPI
it is possible (and in fact common in existing implementations) for two indepen≠
dent groups of processes to use the same context tag. The MPI forum decided
it was too difficult and expensive to generate a unique context tag. This means
that it is unsafe for two groups to send messages to each other. To solve this
problem, MPI introduces an inter≠communicator which allows two groups of
processes to agree upon a safe communication context. Collective operations
such as broadcast are not supported over inter≠communicators, but this is be≠
9

Call lib Call lib
lib
lib
Worker 0 Worker 1
context b
a
b
a
Setcontext( )
Setcontext( ) Setcontext( )
b
Setcontext( )
Send(1,tag)
Send(1,tag)
Recv(1,tag)
Recv(0,tag)
Send(0,tag)
Recv(0,tag)
context
a
No Context
Figure 1: Messages sent without context are erroneously received
ing discussed for inclusion in MPI≠2. Having two types of communicators and
having to convert between them is sometimes confusing, always messy, but nec≠
essary given MPI's mandate not to require a server or daemon process. The
static nature of communicators makes it cumbersome to spawn new tasks and
enable communication between old and new tasks. Finally, when a task fails,
the world communicator becomes invalid. Because all intra≠communicators
are derived from this now invalid construction, the behavior of the program
becomes undefined (and implementation dependent).
Since PVM already has a set of daemon processes maintaining the virtual
machine, it can use these to create a system≠wide unique context tag, which
leads to a simpler and more general context model. PVM 3.4 views context as
merely another tag (without wildcarding). Primitives are provided for tasks to
request a new unique context tag. The program may use and distribute this
context in exactly the same way that MPI does. For example, in PVM 3.4 there
is a synchronous group formation operation that allocates and distributes a new
context to all members. This is analogous to the MPI group formation. But
in PVM the different groups are each guaranteed a unique context, removing
the need for separate intra≠ and inter≠communication constructs. As long as
a process knows (or can find out) the context of a group, it can communicate
with that group.
Other advantages to the PVM context scheme are that new processes can
use existing contexts to start communicating with an existing group. This is
especially useful for fault≠tolerant programs that want to replace failed tasks.
10

In contrast, if a task fails in MPI, the result is undefined and usually leads
to system shutdown. The generality of the PVM approach, however, results
in some thorny issues involving when to reclaim context values for reuse. We
consider an existing communicator to be corrupted if one or more member
processes fail before the communicator has been collectively freed. There is
no one ``correct'' answer on how to deal with corrupted communicators. Auto≠
matic recycling may cause errors in fault≠tolerant programs. No recycling may
exhaust system resources.
MPI≠1 side steps this issue by requiring tasks to never fail. MPI≠2 will
have to address this problem since it allows tasks to spawn new tasks and
processes may be notified about other failed processes. The fundamental prob≠
lem is that the MPI COMM WORLD communicator, from which most intra≠
communicators are derived, becomes corrupted. This leads to undefined con≠
sequences.
To maintain backwards compatibility with existing PVM codes, a con≠
text tag has not been explicitly added to the argument lists of pvm send and
pvm recv. Instead, a PVM task has an operating context that can be queried
and set by the program. Sends and receives are carried out in the current
operational context.
PVM 3.4 has the concept of a base context. All tasks will know the base
context and will be able to use it for communication even in the event of task
failure. In PVM, a spawned task will inherit the current operational context
of its parent. If the task has no parent (i.e., the task was started from the
command line), then it operates in the base context. Inheritance provides an
easy way for a master to encapsulate the messages of several parallel worker
groups.
PVM 3.4 will add some MPI≠like communicator constructions, which are
shown in Table 1. The collective call pvm staticgroup() takes a list of tids and
returns a group communicator id. This allows PVM programs to arbitrarily
construct groups of processes with context. Group send and receive functions
will be added that take a group id and a rank as arguments. These functions
are ``syntactic sugars'' that handle the mappings of group rank to tids and the
proper management of the operating context.
Not having a context argument in pvm send points out an advantage MPI
has over PVM in general. MPI was designed to be thread≠safe, that is, there
is no hidden state that could complicate writing a multi≠threaded application.
PVM has hidden state in both the active context and the active message buffer.
This requires programmers to be very careful when writing multi≠threaded
PVM applications.
7. Name Service
It is often desirable for two programs to start independently and discover
information about each other. A common mechanism is for each of the pro≠
grams to key on a ``well≠known name'' to look up information in a database.
11

function PVM MPI≠1
communicator
creation
pvm staticgroup MPI COMM CREATE
MPI INTERCOMM CREATE
communicator
destruction
pvm lvgroup MPI COMM FREE
new context pvm newcontext MPI COMM DUP
inter≠
communication
no restrictions some restrictions
support fault
tolerance
yes no
Table 1: Similarities between manipulating communicators in PVM and MPI
A program that returns information about a requested name is called a name
server.
PVM is completely dynamic. Hosts may be added to and deleted from the
virtual machine. Processes may start, run to completion and then exit. The
dynamic nature of PVM makes name service very useful and convenient. In
PVM 3.4, the distributed set of PVM daemons have added functionality to
allow them to perform name server functions.
In comparison, MPI≠1 supplies no functionality that requires a name server.
MPI≠2 proposes to add functions to allow independent groups of processes to
synchronize and create an inter≠communicator between them. The functions
are being defined so as not to mandate the use of a name server, allowing
implementations the freedom to use existing server software.
In PVM 3.4, there is a general name service. A PVM task or PVM daemon
can construct an arbitrary message and `put' this message in the name server
with an associated key. The key is a user defined string. Tasks that look
up a name are sent the stored message. This sort of name service is a very
general mechanism. The message could, for example, contain a group of task
ID's and an associated context, the location of a particular server, or simply
initialization data.
The insertion allows a task to specify the owner of the named message. The
owner may be any process, including a pvmd. A message is deleted when an
owner (or the pvmd) explictly calls pvm del, when the owner exits the virtual
machine, or when the entire virtual machine is reset. Two tasks may not insert
the same name since only the first insertion will succeed. The second insertion
returns an error. This has the advantage that third party modules, such as
visualizers, may start up, query the name server, and insure that they are
unique across the entire virtual machine.
There are three basic calls for the PVM name server:
12

pvm putmsg() Insert (key,message) pair into name server and specify owner
pvm getmsg() Return inserted message (if any) from key
pvm delmsg() Owner may delete a message from name server
Table 2: Routines that support name service
8. Message Handlers
User≠level message handlers provide an extensible mechanism for building
event≠driven codes that easily co≠exist with traditional messaging. Both PVM
3.4 and MPI≠2 will have user≠level message handlers. A program may register a
handler function so that when a specified message arrives at a task, the function
is executed. Message handlers are therefore very similar to active messages with
the caveat in PVM that they cannot interrupt a program while it is operating
outside of the PVM library. There will be two PVM interface calls for message
handlers:
pvm addmh() Add a message handler function matching (src,tag,context)
pvm delmh() Remove a previously defined message handler
Table 3: Routines that support message handlers
PVM has always had message handlers for system use. For example, when
a direct connection is requested, a message is sent from the requester to the
receiver. This request message is intercepted by the pvm library software before
it can be received by the user's code. The handler opens a socket and replies
to the requestor.
There are many possibilities for using message handlers. The following
example code segment shows a handler that returns the contents of a local
counter:
static int counter;
void showócount()
--
sbuf = pvmósetsbuf(0); /* remember the current send buf */
mysbuf = pvmóinitsend(PvmDataDefault);
pvmópkint(&counter,1,1);
pvmósend(src,tag);
pvmófreebuf(mysbuf);
pvmósetsbuf(sbuf); /* restore the send buf */
ù
13

main()
--
pvmóaddmh(showócount);
while(1) --
counter ++;
(do message passing)
ù
ù
The message handler can be called upon entry to any PVM library call. It is
clear from the above code segment that the user must be very careful to save
and restore any modified PVM state.
9. Future Research: PVMPI
The Universitiy of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National Laboratory have
recently begun investigating the feasibility of merging features of PVM and
MPI. The project is called PVMPI [1] and involves creating a programming
environment that allows access to the virtual machine features of PVM and
the message passing features of MPI.
PVMPI would perform three symbiotic functions: It would use vendor im≠
plementations of MPI when available on multiprocessors. It would allow appli≠
cations to access PVM's virtual machine resource control and fault tolerance.
It would transparently use PVM's network communication to transfer data be≠
tween different vendor's MPI implementations allowing them to interoperate
within the larger virtual machine.
10. Conclusion
The recent publicity surrounding MPI has caused programmers to wonder
if they should use the existing de facto standard, PVM, or whether they should
shift their codes to the MPI standard. In this paper we compared the features
of the two APIs and pointed out situations where one is better suited than the
other.
If an application is going to be developed and executed on a single MPP,
then MPI has the advantage of expected higher communication performance.
The application would be portable to other vendor's MPP so it would not need
to be tied to a particular vendor. MPI has a much richer set of communication
functions so MPI is favored when an application is structured to exploit special
communication modes not available in PVM. The most often cited example is
the non≠blocking send.
Some sacrifices have been made in the MPI specification in order to be
able to produce high communication performance. Two of the most notable
are the lack of interoperability between any of the MPI implementations, that
14

is, one vendor's MPI cannot send a messages to another vendor's MPI. The
second is the lack of ability to write fault tolerant applications in MPI. The
MPI specification states that the only thing that is guaranteed after an MPI
error is the ability to exit the program.
Because PVM is built around the concept of a virtual machine, PVM has the
advantage when the application is going to run over a networked collection of
hosts, particularly if the hosts are heterogeneous. PVM contains resource man≠
agement and process control functions that are important for creating portable
applications that run on clusters of workstations and MPP.
The larger the cluster of hosts, the more important PVM's fault tolerant
features become. The ability to write long running PVM applications that can
continue even when hosts or tasks fail, or loads change dynamically due to
outside influence, is quite important to heterogeneous distributed computing.
Programmers should evaluate the functional requirements and running en≠
vironment of their application and choose the API that has the features they
need.
References
[1] Graham E. Fagg and Jack J. Dongarra. PVMPI: An integration of the
PVM and MPI systems. Calculateurs Paralleles, 2, 1996.
[2] MPI Forum. MPI: A message≠passing interface standard. International
Journal of Supercomputer Application, 8 (3/4):165 -- 416, 1994.
[3] Al Geist, Adam Beguelin, Jack Dongarra, Weicheng Jiang, Robert
Manchek, and Vaidy Sunderam. PVM: Parallel Virtual Machine. MIT
press, 1994.
[4] G. A. Geist and V. S. Sunderam. Network≠based concurrent computing on
the PVM system. Concurrency: Practice & Experience, 4 (4):293 -- 311,
1992.
[5] Ken Koch and Harvey Wasserman. A message passing algorithm for
Sn transport. In Proceedings of 1996 PVM User Group meeting, 1996.
http://bay.lanl.gov/pvmug96.
[6] Jim Pruyne and Miron Livny. Providing resource management ser≠
vices to parallel applications. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Environments and Tools for Parallel Scientific Computing, 1994.
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/publications.html.
[7] Jim Pruyne and Miron Livny.
Parallel processing on dynamic resources with CARMI. In Proceedings
of IPPS'95, 1995. http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/publications.html.
[8] V. S. Sunderam. PVM: A framework for parallel distributed computing.
Concurrency: Practice & Experience, 2 (4), 1990.
15

[9] BBN ToolWorks. Totalview parallel debugger.
http://www.bbn.com:80/tv.
[10] S. VanderWiel, D. Nathanson, and D. Lilja. Performance and program
complexity in contemporary network≠based parallel computing systems.
Technical Report HPPC≠96≠02, University of Minnesota, 1996.
16

